# AutoFDO profiles for Android common kernels

This directory contains AutoFDO profiles for Android common kernels. These profiles are used to
optimize kernel builds, improving performance for specific architectures and kernel versions.

## kernel.afdo

The AutoFDO profile (kernel.afdo) for vmlinux is collected on kernel version 6.6.100 (
SHA 4ef3d9b76a6cc5456e55e5dbb3492594d5f89e50, build server ID 14054898) using Pixel 6.

## Performance improvements

The following benchmarks demonstrate the performance gains from the latest AutoFDO profile.
Please note that results can fluctuate slightly between updates due to inherent testing noise.
A profile is considered successful when it yields positive improvements across the majority of
benchmarks. All tests were performed on Pixel 6 devices.

| Benchmark             | Improvement |
| --------------------- | ----------- |
| Boot time             | 2.2%        |
| Cold App launch time  | 4.4%        |
| Binder-rpc            | 8.6%        |
| Binder-addints        | 12.6%       |
| Hwbinder              | 12.6%       |
| Bionic (syscall_mmap) | 6.3%        |

Other improvements tested on past profiles:

| Benchmark        | Improvement |
| ---------------- | ----------- |
| Bionic (pthread) | 1.9%        |
| Bionic (stdio)   | 5.4%        |
| Bionic (all)     | 2.9%        |

To test a kernel prebuilt with the AutoFDO profile, navigate to [Android build server](
https://ci.android.com/builds/branches/aosp_kernel-common-android15-6.6/grid) and download
the kernel prebuilts under the `kernel_aarch64_autofdo` target.

## Steps to reproduce the profile

A kernel profile is generated by running app crawling and app launching for top 100 apps from Google
Play Store. While running, we collect ETM data for the kernel, which records executed instruction
stream. Finally, we merge and convert ETM data to one AutoFDO profile.

### 1. Build a kernel image and flash it on an Android device
  * The source code and test device used to generate each profile are described above.
  * We use a Pixel device. But using other real devices should get a similar profile.

### 2. Run app crawling and app launching for top 100 apps
  * Add a gmail account on the test device. Because app crawler can use the account to automatically
    login some of the apps.
  * We run [App Crawler](https://developer.android.com/studio/test/other-testing-tools/app-crawler)
    for one app for 3 minutes, and run it twice.
  * We run app launching for one app for 3 seconds, and run it 15 times. After each running, the
    app is killed and cache is cleared. So we get profile for cold app startups.

### 3. Generate the AutoFDO profile

First, collect performance data using simpleperf with Coresight ETM or ARM ETE while running app
crawling and app launching scenarios. Following is an example recording kernel activity for 180
seconds. For a complete guide, refer to [Record ETM data for the kernel](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/system/extras/+/refs/heads/android16-release/simpleperf/doc/collect_etm_data_for_autofdo.md#A-complete-example_kernel).

```sh
(device) / $ simpleperf record -e cs-etm:k -a --duration 180 -z -o perf.data
```

Next, convert the ETM data to an AutoFDO profile using `simpleperf inject` and `create_llvm_prof`
on the host machine. For a complete guide, refer to [Convert ETM data to AutoFDO Profile on Host](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/system/extras/+/refs/heads/android16-release/simpleperf/doc/collect_etm_data_for_autofdo.md#A-complete-example_kernel).

Note that `create_llvm_prof` recently enabled the symbol list by default, which can cause Clang
to de-optimize any kernel function not listed in the profile. This is usually not we want in the
kernel, unless the profile cover all critical paths. So we recommend adding `--prof_sym_list=false`
to avoid de-optimization. This also prevents the following build error from section mismatch.

```
WARNING: modpost: vmlinux: section mismatch in reference: list_add+0x0 (section: .text.hot.list_add) -> dir_list (section: .init.data)
```

We use the following command to perform the conversion.

```sh
# Convert the AutoFDO profile to the LLVM profile format:
# The --prof_sym_list=false flag is important for kernel profiles. Without it, clang
# assumes any function not listed in the profile is cold. This can lead to unwanted
# deoptimizations, even when -fprofile-sample-accurate is not enabled.
(host) $ create_llvm_prof --profiler=text --binary={vmlinux_dir}/vmlinux \
         --profile=kernel.autofdo --format=extbinary --use_fs_discriminator \
         --out=kernel.afdo --prof_sym_list=false
```
